okay so i think we're gonna get started and uh hopefully david will get started and uh hopefully david will soon join soon join so hey everyone welcome to another so hey everyone welcome to another protocol meeting i'm filling in for uh protocol meeting i'm filling in for uh justin today justin today uh i am seeing this so in these meetings uh i am seeing this so in these meetings we discuss potential protocol changes we discuss potential protocol changes these changes are outlined in these these changes are outlined in these documents called caps or advancement documents called caps or advancement proposals proposals and and the big change we're working on right the big change we're working on right now is project jump cannon which are now is project jump cannon which are which is a feature to introduce native which is a feature to introduce native smart contracts on stellar smart contracts on stellar so we've divided this massive change so we've divided this massive change into a set of composable caps into a set of composable caps um and the agenda specifically for today um and the agenda specifically for today is we're going to talk about cap 53 is we're going to talk about cap 53 smart contract data this was recently smart contract data this was recently published by graden published by graden uh we're going to talk about cap 52 uh we're going to talk about cap 52 smart contract interactions smart contract interactions minimal which was recently introduced by minimal which was recently introduced by john john and we're going to talk about the smart
and we're going to talk about the smart contract life cycle cat 47 contract life cycle cat 47 which was recently updated by siddharth which was recently updated by siddharth um and uh um and uh requires some um requires some um for the discussion so uh let's do this for the discussion so uh let's do this uh graded can you kick this off with a uh graded can you kick this off with a review of cap53 yeah just give me one second all right got it yeah uh sorry i just i had the pull request open and then i actually pull request open and then i actually wanted to switch over to the merged wanted to switch over to the merged version of it version of it so this is a fairly straightforward cap so this is a fairly straightforward cap it's not um it's not really introducing it's not um it's not really introducing anything that anything that probably will be a surprise to anyone probably will be a surprise to anyone here uh it's just formalizing something here uh it's just formalizing something that was left out or left sort of for that was left out or left sort of for future caps in the modularization that future caps in the modularization that we've been doing we've been doing splitting off conversation into splitting off conversation into different pieces so that we can work on different pieces so that we can work on them separately and land them separately them separately and land them separately but it's fairly tightly related to the
but it's fairly tightly related to the data model that was presented in cap 46 data model that was presented in cap 46 so a lot of the motives in cap 46 uh so a lot of the motives in cap 46 uh around the data model implicitly talked about how uh how that data would be stored how that data would be stored permanently so there's there's permanently so there's there's there's concerns that that bear on the there's concerns that that bear on the data model that are uh sort of data model that are uh sort of interacting with it while it's in memory interacting with it while it's in memory and then there are concerns uh more and then there are concerns uh more related to its long-lived uh related to its long-lived uh accessibility over over uh multiple accessibility over over uh multiple invocations of a smart contract uh well invocations of a smart contract uh well it's stored on the blockchain so um it's stored on the blockchain so um some of the requirements uh that are some of the requirements uh that are sort of sort of rephrased and and brought into the rephrased and and brought into the foreground here foreground here uh have to do with interoperability uh have to do with interoperability where we we want there to be something a where we we want there to be something a little bit little bit a little bit more general um a little bit more general um or i say uh sort of a less general more or i say uh sort of a less general more interoperable more generally understood interoperable more generally understood more widely understood structure to the more widely understood structure to the data than just a byte buffer a lot of
data than just a byte buffer a lot of smart contract platforms essentially smart contract platforms essentially only provide a byte buffer storage only provide a byte buffer storage service to smart contracts which means service to smart contracts which means that nobody really accepts that exact that nobody really accepts that exact version of the smart contract code can version of the smart contract code can necessarily read any of the data necessarily read any of the data that's stored there and that that that's stored there and that that produces interoperability problems uh if produces interoperability problems uh if other third parties want to access it other third parties want to access it offline you know browsers that want to offline you know browsers that want to take a look at the data it also creates take a look at the data it also creates versioning problems because it means versioning problems because it means that you're that you're originally locked to the originally locked to the schema language schema language or serialization format that the or serialization format that the contract used uh it means the contract contract used uh it means the contract wants to pass data it has to from one wants to pass data it has to from one contract to another it has to transform contract to another it has to transform it so there's a whole interoperability it so there's a whole interoperability angle here uh which we wanted to address angle here uh which we wanted to address in in the cat 46 data model and we're in in the cat 46 data model and we're carrying that forward here and i think a carrying that forward here and i think a lot of the the concerns lot of the the concerns only make sense uh when considered in only make sense uh when considered in terms of persistent data but this is the terms of persistent data but this is the persistent data uh persistent data uh cap so so uh here we're just talking cap so so uh here we're just talking about basically what the ledger entries about basically what the ledger entries is gonna store things looks like and
is gonna store things looks like and a handful of host functions for for a handful of host functions for for accessing it they're very basic accessing it they're very basic functions they're just key values to our functions they're just key values to our access functions they're point access access functions they're point access functions they're not range range functions they're not range range functions they don't include uh functions they don't include uh iterators or range queries or anything iterators or range queries or anything like that they're just get put like that they're just get put does do we have a key and delete the key does do we have a key and delete the key very simple uh host functions the very simple uh host functions the interesting thing really is interesting thing really is the choice of granularity which is left to the user so this is a little bit different in in that um many blockchains blockchains provide a provide a this is this is different than many many this is this is different than many many smart contract systems you'll see many smart contract systems you'll see many smart contract systems provide a key smart contract systems provide a key value store which is keyed by a byte value store which is keyed by a byte string or some some kind of a prefix string or some some kind of a prefix that goes into a merkle tree or that goes into a merkle tree or something like that something like that um um we do not have uh we do not have uh we essentially don't expose any interior we essentially don't expose any interior nodes of the mercalli storage that we nodes of the mercalli storage that we use uh to use this anyway use uh to use this anyway we just provide a single bucket list
we just provide a single bucket list hash the fact that our data structure hash the fact that our data structure has internal localization doesn't really has internal localization doesn't really apply here anyway apply here anyway um and structurally it wouldn't make um and structurally it wouldn't make sense sense but but um um [Music] [Music] what we're what we're doing here is also what we're what we're doing here is also allowing uh structured values as keys allowing uh structured values as keys rather than um rather than um rather than byte string so of course you rather than byte string so of course you know you can serialize any value and know you can serialize any value and you will in the case of using it as a you will in the case of using it as a string here but the api is encouraging string here but the api is encouraging users to have fairly structured values users to have fairly structured values so they can have fairly rich keys um so they can have fairly rich keys um [Music] [Music] and implicit to all of this is that there's there's a parallel access and there's there's a parallel access and consistency model consistency model uh that's discussed in this cap uh that's discussed in this cap um um which is that we're we're trying to which is that we're we're trying to encourage the possibility of executing encourage the possibility of executing smart contracts in parallel and if you smart contracts in parallel and if you have parallel access to have parallel access to uh a data store uh a data store you have to talk about what the you have to talk about what the consistency model is what is it what consistency model is what is it what does it mean when two different does it mean when two different users access that that model users access that that model in parallel um so we're specifying here
in parallel um so we're specifying here that it's a serializability consistency that it's a serializability consistency model uh which is the strongest possible model uh which is the strongest possible it says you know equivalent to the exact it says you know equivalent to the exact order that the transaction sets uh order that the transaction sets uh specified the transactions executing in specified the transactions executing in that has to be the observable that has to be the observable side effect model side effect model and and parallel models uh parallel consistency parallel models uh parallel consistency models uh imply the existence of some models uh imply the existence of some kind of a concurrency control mechanism kind of a concurrency control mechanism how how you actually enforce that how how you actually enforce that uh and uh and in in this in in this cap we're talking a little bit about um cap we're talking a little bit about um a very strong uh mechanism for a very strong uh mechanism for concurrency control it's what's it's concurrency control it's what's it's what's typically called deterministic uh what's typically called deterministic uh scheduling or non-conflicting scheduling or non-conflicting concurrency control concurrency control the idea is that every uh transaction the idea is that every uh transaction that enters the system will pre-declare that enters the system will pre-declare a footprint so there's this thing called a footprint so there's this thing called the footprint which is the the set of the footprint which is the the set of keys that a transaction is going to keys that a transaction is going to touch whether it's going to read them or touch whether it's going to read them or write them it actually marks whether it write them it actually marks whether it reads or writes each key in reads or writes each key in its footprint and the footprint is is
its footprint and the footprint is is static information that accompanies a static information that accompanies a transaction so transaction so this cap doesn't describe exactly how a this cap doesn't describe exactly how a footprint is encoded or accompanies a footprint is encoded or accompanies a transaction location because we don't transaction location because we don't even have a cap open right now that has even have a cap open right now that has transaction invocation transaction invocation or at least we haven't settled on one we or at least we haven't settled on one we have several caps open right now have several caps open right now but when transaction invocation uh but when transaction invocation uh occurs it it's going to need to provide occurs it it's going to need to provide a footprint uh in in this cap this cap a footprint uh in in this cap this cap is asking that that uh is asking that that uh footprints are available and the footprints are available and the footprint defines footprint defines um um the keys that are the keys that are uh that the transaction is allowed to uh that the transaction is allowed to perform these data access operations on perform these data access operations on so if you try to perform a get again so if you try to perform a get again something that's not in your footprint something that's not in your footprint uh the get will fail even even if the uh the get will fail even even if the the value is there if it's not the value is there if it's not in the transaction's implicit footprint in the transaction's implicit footprint um um it's defined as failing uh similarly for it's defined as failing uh similarly for a put or even has a point query anything a put or even has a point query anything like that um like that um you have to have it in the footprint so you have to have it in the footprint so so for simple transactions this is so for simple transactions this is fairly straightforward you can tell what fairly straightforward you can tell what they're going to read or write and so they're going to read or write and so you just put things in the footprint
you just put things in the footprint that they're going to read or write that they're going to read or write that's fine that's fine for for complicated transactions that have a complicated transactions that have a highly dynamic behavior maybe maybe it's highly dynamic behavior maybe maybe it's not even clear what they're going to not even clear what they're going to read or write because it's it's you know read or write because it's it's you know subsequent to a transaction uh subsequent to a transaction uh it's it's determined by an earlier read it's it's determined by an earlier read in the transaction these are what are in the transaction these are what are called uh called uh transactions with dynamic footprints transactions with dynamic footprints um the um the recommendation uh in this in this gap uh recommendation uh in this in this gap uh and what we what we're prototyping is a and what we what we're prototyping is a fairly standard technique from the fairly standard technique from the literature um which is often called literature um which is often called reconnaissance queries uh i think i'm reconnaissance queries uh i think i'm using them here i'm using the term uh using them here i'm using the term uh recording footprint recording here which recording footprint recording here which is that you just run the transaction is that you just run the transaction offline uh before you submit it on on a offline uh before you submit it on on a read snapshot and that gives you read snapshot and that gives you a a fairly good guess and an approximate a a fairly good guess and an approximate footprint that you can then staple to footprint that you can then staple to the real transaction when you submit it the real transaction when you submit it and uh it will succeed and uh it will succeed if that footprint still matches so uh it if that footprint still matches so uh it essentially pushes concurrency control
essentially pushes concurrency control uh out of the the transaction processing uh out of the the transaction processing loop and uh into the user's lap and so loop and uh into the user's lap and so the the user is now racing the the user is now racing on divergence between read snapshots on divergence between read snapshots that they use to construct their that they use to construct their footprint and the footprint that they footprint and the footprint that they actually submit a transaction with and actually submit a transaction with and so theoretically if there's a very very so theoretically if there's a very very highly contended key and it's a very highly contended key and it's a very different query they may have to retry different query they may have to retry multiple times because if they get if multiple times because if they get if there's any significant divergence there's any significant divergence between the the recorded footprint and between the the recorded footprint and the footprint they submit uh their the footprint they submit uh their transaction could fail transaction could fail but the but the database itself doesn't have to actually database itself doesn't have to actually perform the concurrency control so in perform the concurrency control so in some ways this is shedding load from a some ways this is shedding load from a concurrency control mechanism inside of concurrency control mechanism inside of a database out to the users a database out to the users um um and and that has that has turned out to work very well for for turned out to work very well for for maintaining a very even high throughput maintaining a very even high throughput um on um on existing databases that adopt this existing databases that adopt this technique so we're trying to adopt that technique so we're trying to adopt that technique as well technique as well so those are the the two sort of main so those are the the two sort of main topics in here that the fact that
topics in here that the fact that the user has control over granularity i the user has control over granularity i should go back and talk a little bit should go back and talk a little bit more about granularity just for a second more about granularity just for a second which is that the the granularity which is that the the granularity control that exists here um control that exists here um it has a natural tension in it so it's it has a natural tension in it so it's so so doing a point read on a key value store doing a point read on a key value store necessarily has some overhead it has it necessarily has some overhead it has it has data framing overhead it has has data framing overhead it has serialization overhead it involves going serialization overhead it involves going to the i o system at all it involves to the i o system at all it involves touching the disk doing a seek doing a touching the disk doing a seek doing a read read all of that overhead is all of that overhead is um um [Music] [Music] potentially quite high and and so it's potentially quite high and and so it's it can be worth trying to amortize that it can be worth trying to amortize that overhead and read more than one item if overhead and read more than one item if you are going to access more than one you are going to access more than one item you don't necessarily item you don't necessarily uh want to to pay that on on a bit by uh want to to pay that on on a bit by bit or bite by bite basis you want to bit or bite by bite basis you want to bring in a bunch of bytes at a time when bring in a bunch of bytes at a time when you do an i o and so that amortization you do an i o and so that amortization tension pushes you towards tension pushes you towards larger ios larger ios in a larger granularity of storage in a larger granularity of storage but then the flip side of that of course but then the flip side of that of course is that if you read or write data that is that if you read or write data that you don't actually need if it's if it's
you don't actually need if it's if it's wasted and you actually only wanted to wasted and you actually only wanted to change one byte in the middle of a large change one byte in the middle of a large data structure that's waste and you're data structure that's waste and you're paying for that waste uh in terms of you paying for that waste uh in terms of you know fees or cpu time or io or whatever know fees or cpu time or io or whatever so that that pushes you in the opposite so that that pushes you in the opposite direction of having direction of having fine grained data and [Music] [Music] that problem actually just magnifies that problem actually just magnifies itself when you start talking about itself when you start talking about parallelism because again your footprint parallelism because again your footprint is a unit of contention and so if two is a unit of contention and so if two transactions contend on the same data transactions contend on the same data value value um they can't execute in parallel um they can't execute in parallel basically that's that's that's what the basically that's that's that's what the footprint is is doing is that it's footprint is is doing is that it's giving a static scheduler the giving a static scheduler the opportunity to opportunity to partition execution into separate lanes partition execution into separate lanes and then those lanes will run with no and then those lanes will run with no coordination coordination but but those lanes necessarily are serial those lanes necessarily are serial themselves you only get parallels themselves you only get parallels between them and so if you have between them and so if you have a whole lot of transactions for example a whole lot of transactions for example that all touch that all touch some common some common data value in their footprint they will data value in their footprint they will all be scheduled to run in serial
all be scheduled to run in serial and and so to exploit parallelism it is it is in so to exploit parallelism it is it is in the favor of the user to have a the favor of the user to have a finer grained uh footprints so finer grained uh footprints so so you have this sort of so you have this sort of two different directions of pressure two different directions of pressure it's a natural trade-off between it's a natural trade-off between fine-grained and coarse-grained uh fine-grained and coarse-grained uh data access and so we don't specify what data access and so we don't specify what what the granularity is here we try to what the granularity is here we try to be very open about that and and so be very open about that and and so um that's why the key type is is um that's why the key type is is literally just an arbitrary value literally just an arbitrary value um um i think that's all i really had to say i think that's all i really had to say about that there's not a lot in this in about that there's not a lot in this in this gap it's actually quite small and this gap it's actually quite small and it it kind of just does exactly what it it kind of just does exactly what you're expected as a key value type awesome can you um just quickly talk about the rationale just quickly talk about the rationale for why there is uh point access only uh yeah so um um range queries essentially aren't range queries essentially aren't
range queries essentially aren't compatible with static footprints um compatible with static footprints um because you know we don't we don't know because you know we don't we don't know how far they go how far they go um that's that's the simple version um we we could theoretically but we would lose parallelism so lose parallelism so yeah yeah awesome so we are awesome so we are kind of like actively trying to deter kind of like actively trying to deter um um you know contract developers from you know contract developers from creating these like um creating these like um um you know creating like a need for um you know creating like a need for rangers with some you know like for rangers with some you know like for example like a classic or the book is example like a classic or the book is probably like not a great fit for this probably like not a great fit for this uh which is uh which is okay with us yeah and i mean there it's a good point which is that in in in it's a good point which is that in in in in a broader sense um in a broader sense um a static footprint actually bounds the i a static footprint actually bounds the i o you're going to do it allows us i o you're going to do it allows us i mentioned this in in the contract it it mentioned this in in the contract it it it allows us to it allows us to essentially have no surprises the essentially have no surprises the contract is not going to be interrupted contract is not going to be interrupted in the middle of the contract in order in the middle of the contract in order to actually go touch the disk to actually go touch the disk dynamically everything that it's going
dynamically everything that it's going to read to read it says upfront and therefore we can it says upfront and therefore we can just do a bulk read at the beginning of just do a bulk read at the beginning of the contract the contract um um just in fact we'll integrate into a just in fact we'll integrate into a single pass through the the storage single pass through the the storage system uh all all of the reads from all system uh all all of the reads from all of the contracts in a given parallel execution lane will just read all their data at once at will just read all their data at once at the beginning of a transaction set the beginning of a transaction set execution and then write it back at the execution and then write it back at the end so that end so that [Music] [Music] that kind of thing is is naturally that kind of thing is is naturally incompatible with something like dynamic incompatible with something like dynamic range queries but that said uh because you can store you know arbitrary because you can store you know arbitrary values if you want to store a map um values if you want to store a map um that's that's completely reasonable one that's that's completely reasonable one of the values that you store it doesn't of the values that you store it doesn't have to be just a small string or a have to be just a small string or a number or something you can store number or something you can store a map that has a bunch of stuff in it uh a map that has a bunch of stuff in it uh and then do a range query on that map and then do a range query on that map it's just that when you do an i o you're it's just that when you do an i o you're going to get the entire map is going to going to get the entire map is going to come off the disk so you have to sort of come off the disk so you have to sort of navigate that trade off yourself maybe navigate that trade off yourself maybe shard your map into a bunch of different shard your map into a bunch of different sub maps or something like that if sub maps or something like that if you're interested in not loading and
you're interested in not loading and storing the whole thing every time when i tried to uh to use a very early version of this design version of this design like a month ago or something like a month ago or something one of the kind of like um one of the kind of like um annoyances that i quickly encountered annoyances that i quickly encountered was like was like when i wanted to when i wanted to you know partition my namespace i you know partition my namespace i basically was like okay well basically was like okay well i need some kind of key that is a tuple i need some kind of key that is a tuple and so i just used like the sc valve and so i just used like the sc valve option option uh and i just like uh and i just like pumped a vec full of stuff and then use pumped a vec full of stuff and then use it as my key that's i got like a it as my key that's i got like a petition namespace the thing was like petition namespace the thing was like doing that seemed like kind of doing that seemed like kind of inefficient inefficient because it's like okay like i need a because it's like okay like i need a three like you know a three tuple as my three like you know a three tuple as my key so i like go i create a vector key so i like go i create a vector host function host function i push into it post function i push into i push into it post function i push into it again host function i push into again it again host function i push into again host function host function uh and then i call uh and then i call the like you know get function host
the like you know get function host function again function again and it just seems like a ton of work to and it just seems like a ton of work to get a single piece of data get a single piece of data so do you have any thoughts about that um off hand i guess i'm i'm off hand i guess i'm i'm i'm not sure that it is a ton of work i'm not sure that it is a ton of work like it would would be my first reaction like it would would be my first reaction in the sense that in the sense that um um [Music] [Music] i don't i don't know know so so so for example you know we could so so so for example you know we could we could make a we could make a contract put one contract put two contract put one contract put two contract put three that takes three contract put three that takes three values as inputs values as inputs three three keys four keys five keys you three three keys four keys five keys you know we could we could know we could we could reflect those usage patterns in function reflect those usage patterns in function signatures as conveniences but i'm not signatures as conveniences but i'm not sure they would do any less work sure they would do any less work and i don't think the calls in and out and i don't think the calls in and out of the vm are actually all that of the vm are actually all that expensive i think you're only talking expensive i think you're only talking about one extra op code and about one extra op code and a couple of like like a push and a call a couple of like like a push and a call so from a user perspective i think you
so from a user perspective i think you have a good point and have a good point and um i think um i think if the sdk can't make that pattern if the sdk can't make that pattern fairly convenient uh in terms of fairly convenient uh in terms of putting you know uh putting you know uh sort of a superficial sort of a superficial uh porcelain on top of it that makes it uh porcelain on top of it that makes it makes it look nice makes it look nice then perhaps we should expand uh the then perhaps we should expand uh the functional repertoire to provide functional repertoire to provide additional support for that additional support for that i think one thing you might be able to i think one thing you might be able to do do just responding to your comment about just responding to your comment about the sdk is the sdk is you know make it easy to use things like you know make it easy to use things like tuples um like tuples um like trying to make it easier to use things trying to make it easier to use things like vex already like vex already um and um and maps uh maps uh you know tuples might just that just you know tuples might just that just might be one thing we could we could might be one thing we could we could have have yeah that's that's kind of what i'm yeah that's that's kind of what i'm expecting is that you can you can do the expecting is that you can you can do the the kind of thing that that um the kind of thing that that um you know i you know i hate to use this as precedent but but hate to use this as precedent but but the the raw standard library does the the raw standard library does something something similar here where it just says you know similar here where it just says you know the people use tuffles up to about five
the people use tuffles up to about five or seven or twelve or whatever so like or seven or twelve or whatever so like it just you know macrogenerate enough it just you know macrogenerate enough support for all the basic temple types support for all the basic temple types that anyone's like likely to use and and that anyone's like likely to use and and just have them as conveniences and then just have them as conveniences and then you only wonder how to use this you only wonder how to use this arbitrary vector sort of approach if arbitrary vector sort of approach if you're if you're doing something weird yeah i mean as as long as the cost of doing all the push functions isn't doing all the push functions isn't particularly high particularly high then it it doesn't really matter to me then it it doesn't really matter to me because you could always put sdk support because you could always put sdk support to do this indeed i just built my own to do this indeed i just built my own thing that like i could pass the thing that like i could pass the functions to and inside the parameters functions to and inside the parameters too and it would uh through the vect too and it would uh through the vect back out at me so it would look a lot back out at me so it would look a lot less disgusting less disgusting um we could generalize that of course as um we could generalize that of course as long as the cost isn't high at the long as the cost isn't high at the protocol level so protocol level so i think so i think the cost of a i think so i think the cost of a function call is is fairly function call is is fairly small uh function call and uh i again small uh function call and uh i again absolutely it's the case that if if we absolutely it's the case that if if we measure this and it's miserable i mean measure this and it's miserable i mean the other thing is that i don't i don't the other thing is that i don't i don't honestly think there's honestly think there's masses of i o operations in the normal masses of i o operations in the normal
masses of i o operations in the normal contract path right i think you're only contract path right i think you're only talking about a couple of talking about a couple of point accesses per contract call anyway point accesses per contract call anyway so so i'm i'm not super concerned about that i'm i'm not super concerned about that path but if if if we measure it it turns path but if if if we measure it it turns out to be expensive we can absolutely out to be expensive we can absolutely revisit this and try to you know add revisit this and try to you know add fast pass or optimize versions for this braden d do you think they could be contracts that will be vulnerable to contracts that will be vulnerable to moving footprints so you mentioned about moving footprints so you mentioned about the situation where dynamic footprints the situation where dynamic footprints is an inconvenience or you know you have is an inconvenience or you know you have to do reconnaissance queries and they to do reconnaissance queries and they potentially could be out of date but i'm potentially could be out of date but i'm wondering if there's an angle here where wondering if there's an angle here where that actually makes the contract that actually makes the contract vulnerable in the sense that you know vulnerable in the sense that you know one participant of that contra contract one participant of that contra contract could prevent another participant from could prevent another participant from interacting with it interacting with it yes absolutely um this is yes absolutely um this is as far as i can tell this is basically as far as i can tell this is basically always the case with concurrency control always the case with concurrency control if you have any kind of concurrency if you have any kind of concurrency control mechanism somewhere control mechanism somewhere um you can create a um you can create a starvation you can even you can survive
starvation you can even you can survive one party by by just hammering on a one party by by just hammering on a contended resource contended resource in this particular case the user has the in this particular case the user has the contract developer has a fair amount of contract developer has a fair amount of control over it because they can change control over it because they can change the granularity so if a contract the granularity so if a contract developer developer feels that this is a risk or sees this feels that this is a risk or sees this happening or something like that happening or something like that they can re-architect the contract to they can re-architect the contract to essentially sacrifice concurrency essentially sacrifice concurrency um um [Music] [Music] to get rid of the ability to to get rid of the ability to have that kind of concern so so you know have that kind of concern so so you know at the extreme end your footprint is at the extreme end your footprint is the contract data there's only one the contract data there's only one contract data contract data everyone who talks to this contract everyone who talks to this contract always accesses the exact same contract always accesses the exact same contract data and that means that everyone knows data and that means that everyone knows exactly what their footprint should be exactly what their footprint should be it's always just the contract data it's always just the contract data there's only one element there's only one element everyone specifies the same thing and everyone specifies the same thing and they all get serialized and so there's they all get serialized and so there's no you can never you can never have to no you can never you can never have to to to have your footprint invalidate because have your footprint invalidate because your footprint is always correct your footprint is always correct um so you can do that if you um so you can do that if you find that's happening find that's happening it's just the worst case right so you
it's just the worst case right so you you move away from that if you want more you move away from that if you want more more concurrency but if if you're seeing more concurrency but if if you're seeing that people are able to that people are able to um um able to and and actively exploiting you able to and and actively exploiting you know some kind of of starvation uh know some kind of of starvation uh concurrency starvation situation then concurrency starvation situation then then you may have to move back towards then you may have to move back towards that and that and i don't i don't i don't personally know a way to avoid i don't personally know a way to avoid that i think if we did any kind of that i think if we did any kind of dynamic locking we would be in exactly dynamic locking we would be in exactly the same situation where someone could the same situation where someone could just um flood the system with with uh just um flood the system with with uh transactions that take a lock and and transactions that take a lock and and deny anyone else the ability to make deny anyone else the ability to make progress progress and and we would be in a worse situation because we would be in a worse situation because dynamic and currency the the thing dynamic and currency the the thing that's really good about static and that's really good about static and currency control as an approach currency control as an approach is that you um you have a guaranteed is that you um you have a guaranteed sort of uh throughput that the the sort of uh throughput that the the things that you have scheduled um things that you have scheduled um will complete one way or the other will complete one way or the other within their allotted time slice right within their allotted time slice right they will they will either finish or they will they will either finish or they will abort um and so your abort they will abort um and so your abort rates go up rates go up but the system continues to run
but the system continues to run in uh in this particular in uh in this particular strategy the other strategy would be strategy the other strategy would be more like um we would give people the more like um we would give people the ability to drag the entire system down ability to drag the entire system down so a transaction set uh would would so a transaction set uh would would potentially uh slow down dramatically potentially uh slow down dramatically because people are contending on a hot because people are contending on a hot resource so resource so it's there's there's there aren't a lot it's there's there's there aren't a lot of free lunches in concurrency control of free lunches in concurrency control and and i i kind of feel like that's a and and i i kind of feel like that's a natural trait of you that answer the question i know it's not like a fun answer like a fun answer no yeah i think i think that makes a lot no yeah i think i think that makes a lot of sense the fact that the proposal really gives the contract developer a lot of control the contract developer a lot of control um and doesn't define the level of um and doesn't define the level of granularity that they have to use granularity that they have to use um i like yeah it's good
um well great it looks like you've created one of the least contentious caps that one of the least contentious caps that has ever um has ever um came to life thanks for that came to life thanks for that great um cool so um let's let's dial up on the contentious or the contention levels uh contentious or the contention levels uh john i think this is probably the third john i think this is probably the third iteration of uh smart contract interactions um so for those of you who are here at last so for those of you who are here at last week's meeting you might recall that we week's meeting you might recall that we had a pretty big debate about this had a pretty big debate about this and um and um i was in the interest of actually i was in the interest of actually agreeing on something i decided to just agreeing on something i decided to just remove all the functionality from the remove all the functionality from the proposal which sounds a little backwards proposal which sounds a little backwards but um but um in the context of smart contracts you in the context of smart contracts you can kind of can kind of put all of these authorization questions put all of these authorization questions down to contracts and let them do them down to contracts and let them do them do everything themselves
do everything themselves and we had been kind of moving in that and we had been kind of moving in that direction on cap 50 anyway direction on cap 50 anyway with the introduction of like the with the introduction of like the invoker signature none invoker signature none option and stuff like that option and stuff like that so basically at a high level of what's so basically at a high level of what's in this proposal in this proposal there is a just like in the old proposal there is a just like in the old proposal there is a new operation sorry a new there is a new operation sorry a new transaction type and a corresponding transaction type and a corresponding envelope type called envelope type called uh invoke contract transaction uh invoke contract transaction or invo contract transaction envelope or invo contract transaction envelope and this and this contains the normal and this and this contains the normal stuff like before uh source account stuff like before uh source account sequence number fee sequence number fee it contains the contract that you're it contains the contract that you're invoking you know the id invoking you know the id the parameter the symbol the parameters the parameter the symbol the parameters it contains the read write set that you it contains the read write set that you would need for would need for cap 53 as grading was just talking about cap 53 as grading was just talking about um and then um and then uh uh that's pretty much it that's pretty much it so how does one actually use this there so how does one actually use this there are some examples in the cap which were are some examples in the cap which were pretty instructive about what what the pretty instructive about what what the universe would look like if we actually
universe would look like if we actually did this did this um there's a whole example section where um there's a whole example section where i hacked up i hacked up like two versions of an erc20 type like two versions of an erc20 type contract contract but they look quite different from your but they look quite different from your normal erc20 normal erc20 because there's not really like a because there's not really like a reliable message.sender that you can use reliable message.sender that you can use in this context in this context um um but uh but uh basically basically the only other thing that's here the only other thing that's here is just a few um is just a few um a few host functions a few host functions that are useful for actually doing some that are useful for actually doing some of the things that we discussed last of the things that we discussed last week week um so there's some access to thresholds um so there's some access to thresholds um from accounts there's access to um from accounts there's access to getting the signer weight by account key getting the signer weight by account key by signer key the signer weight for an by signer key the signer weight for an account by signer key kind of hard to account by signer key kind of hard to say say um i added a verified 25 519 function um i added a verified 25 519 function which i think is also in cap 51 which is which i think is also in cap 51 which is being written at the same time being written at the same time and um that's uh that's pretty much it and um that's uh that's pretty much it so um any questions about this
um so i'm i'm just uh uh just trying to uh just trying to get into this can you talk a bit about get into this can you talk a bit about like the implications around like like the implications around like accounts and you know we were talking accounts and you know we were talking about about this a bit last week um like about about this a bit last week um like what does this mean for like you know what does this mean for like you know classic multi-sig accounts on the on the classic multi-sig accounts on the on the smart side uh the beauty of it is that the proposal means basically nothing for those things means basically nothing for those things um because the contracts get to make um because the contracts get to make their own decisions so their own decisions so for some context like if you scroll down for some context like if you scroll down almost all the way to the bottom almost all the way to the bottom the last example is like a sim a simple the last example is like a sim a simple token based on account signatures token based on account signatures and this builds on the classic stellar and this builds on the classic stellar multisig multisig mechanism mechanism um um basically works exactly the same basically works exactly the same with two exceptions no pre-signed with two exceptions no pre-signed transactions here oh sorry no pre-auth
transactions here oh sorry no pre-auth transactions transactions and no hashtag signers and no hashtag signers but it works exactly the same and it but it works exactly the same and it works at medium threshold and everything works at medium threshold and everything kind of is exactly what you would expect kind of is exactly what you would expect um um but right above that there's another but right above that there's another example that uses the like the single example that uses the like the single key version that i was proposing as the key version that i was proposing as the invoker signature last invoker signature last week um week um and so this this framework basically and so this this framework basically lets contracts build whatever they want lets contracts build whatever they want um um if you want some kind of if you want some kind of uh you know support for seller multisig uh you know support for seller multisig that'll really be up to contract that'll really be up to contract developers and ecosystem standards and developers and ecosystem standards and stuff like that stuff like that my intuition is that those things won't my intuition is that those things won't really materialize really materialize because they're not efficient structures because they're not efficient structures on the blockchain but they might they on the blockchain but they might they might materialize from case to case something that immediately jumps out at me with these examples is that it may be me with these examples is that it may be difficult to write these functions
difficult to write these functions um some of these sorry i'm looking at um some of these sorry i'm looking at the simple token based on account the simple token based on account signatures example you were just signatures example you were just referencing referencing and the second code block has a check and the second code block has a check function it says internal function is function it says internal function is that something that that something that the network is providing or that's an the network is providing or that's an internal function that the contract internal function that the contract provides provides that's a contract function that's not that's a contract function that's not exported exported so i can imagine so i can imagine um so i've had to write code like this um so i've had to write code like this for for um for our sdks when we were um for our sdks when we were implementing sept10 and implementing sept10 and i was yeah i think it was septum i was yeah i think it was septum and one thing that and one thing that um is quite difficult to get riders um is quite difficult to get riders iterating over a set of signatures iterating over a set of signatures for a message for a message and determining a set of weights and determining a set of weights because there's different things you because there's different things you have to do like you have to make sure have to do like you have to make sure that you don't that you don't if somebody includes the same signature if somebody includes the same signature twice twice you don't use it twice to get you know you don't use it twice to get you know double the weight double the weight different things like that um different things like that um so do you think by going this approach
so do you think by going this approach expecting people to implement their own expecting people to implement their own authorization authorization we're increasing the chance of foot guns we're increasing the chance of foot guns where people are going to implement what where people are going to implement what they think is stellar maori sig they think is stellar maori sig signature authentic authorization signature authentic authorization verification but it doesn't actually verification but it doesn't actually exactly line up with it exactly line up with it that that's definitely possible that that's definitely possible uh uh i mean my like kind of ideal universe i mean my like kind of ideal universe here here in the sense of like what i hope people in the sense of like what i hope people would do is probably somebody would would do is probably somebody would deploy one contract that has like a deploy one contract that has like a unified key structure a unified signer unified key structure a unified signer scheme basically you pass it some kind scheme basically you pass it some kind of opaque blob the beginning of the of opaque blob the beginning of the opaque blob is a discriminant saying opaque blob is a discriminant saying like hey what kind of signature is this like hey what kind of signature is this is it a single key ed-25519 is it a is it a single key ed-25519 is it a single key ecdsa single key ecdsa is it a um is it a um is it like a stellar multi-sig is it is it like a stellar multi-sig is it some other scheme that i'm not thinking some other scheme that i'm not thinking of like some kind of like quantum reset of like some kind of like quantum reset resistance scheme who cares resistance scheme who cares um and basically like the entire um and basically like the entire ecosystem relies on this contract or ecosystem relies on this contract or sorry another example would be like i
sorry another example would be like i know lee you had requested like aliases know lee you had requested like aliases um we could have like a single ed 25 519 um we could have like a single ed 25 519 alias version all of that implemented in alias version all of that implemented in one contract that everybody kind of one contract that everybody kind of relies on as an ecosystem standard you relies on as an ecosystem standard you don't have to rely on it but if you do don't have to rely on it but if you do you kind of get compatibility across the you kind of get compatibility across the entire universe for free entire universe for free that's what i would hope would happen that's what i would hope would happen instead of everybody rolling their own instead of everybody rolling their own but like yes at the very worst case but like yes at the very worst case everybody rolls their own and if you everybody rolls their own and if you don't know how to roll your own for don't know how to roll your own for example like i didn't account for the um example like i didn't account for the um for the repeated keys in this example for the repeated keys in this example uh working too fast uh working too fast you can get yourself in trouble you can get yourself in trouble and just just to follow up on that and just just to follow up on that part of why i'm a big proponent of part of why i'm a big proponent of single key signatures and doing single key signatures and doing everything else is like you know secure everything else is like you know secure multiple-party communication uh multiple-party communication uh computation computation is because there's a lot less ways to is because there's a lot less ways to blow yourself up on chain a single blow yourself up on chain a single signature is easy to verify in fact my argument would generally be that if you want to write a good that if you want to write a good contract that is really safe and easy to contract that is really safe and easy to audit you should use the simplest
audit you should use the simplest authorization scheme possible authorization scheme possible which is that all right can i ask a follow-up question is that i'm i'm a little bit is that i'm i'm a little bit well i'll be honest i'm a little bit well i'll be honest i'm a little bit behind on on this entire aspect of the behind on on this entire aspect of the interactions um interactions um [Music] [Music] if you're dealing with a case where if you're dealing with a case where people do use the simplest and safest people do use the simplest and safest approach approach but you know suppose you're a smart but you know suppose you're a smart contract author who's trying to be contract author who's trying to be conservative and you don't want to do conservative and you don't want to do anything too elaborate anything too elaborate and you're using this interface am i and you're using this interface am i correct in reading this that you are correct in reading this that you are probably you're probably not going to have to include an awful lot of code in your include an awful lot of code in your contract to make this work right contract to make this work right is that correct that the the sort of the is that correct that the the sort of the number of calls that you have to make to number of calls that you have to make to host functions is not particularly huge host functions is not particularly huge you're talking about in the case of like you're talking about in the case of like a single 80 25 590 right that's right
a single 80 25 590 right that's right yeah in that case like it's very very yeah in that case like it's very very simple simple um that example is in the first one um that example is in the first one and like the code is basically like and like the code is basically like check the nonce check the nonce hash your hasher you know message do a hash your hasher you know message do a do a 80 25 5 19 post function call do a 80 25 5 19 post function call that's pretty much it that's pretty much it and everything just traps if the wrong and everything just traps if the wrong thing happens and thing happens and you could probably write this in like you could probably write this in like five lines three host function calls or five lines three host function calls or four host function calls um pretty four host function calls um pretty pretty lightweight all told pretty lightweight all told and it's pretty hard to escape and it's pretty hard to escape all of like some of these parts no all of like some of these parts no matter what you do like at some point if matter what you do like at some point if you're going to do the authorization you're going to do the authorization on-chain you probably need to do at on-chain you probably need to do at least one 80 25 5 19 signature least one 80 25 5 19 signature verification or ecdsa signature verification or ecdsa signature verification verification so i it probably could be like a little so i it probably could be like a little lighter than this but probably not lighter than this but probably not significantly lighter than this significantly lighter than this well i guess this well i guess this i'm i'm just being my typical um trying i'm i'm just being my typical um trying to shave things down approach uh
to shave things down approach uh this feels to me like this feels to me like even the minimal version is a even the minimal version is a blob of code that will have to get blob of code that will have to get stapled onto every single smart contract stapled onto every single smart contract and they will all run and they will all run you know even even if they all wind up you know even even if they all wind up being conservative and they'll take your being conservative and they'll take your advice and be conservative advice and be conservative um this is all in vm rather than extra um this is all in vm rather than extra vm there's no there's no way for them to vm there's no there's no way for them to say say fastpath may just do this conservative fastpath may just do this conservative thing so yes and no yes and no because like because like even though i think that everybody will even though i think that everybody will be conservative i still think the ideal be conservative i still think the ideal universe of everybody being conservative universe of everybody being conservative is them all using a single is them all using a single you know contract that implements this you know contract that implements this all so that you don't end up with the all so that you don't end up with the same code cloned everywhere you just same code cloned everywhere you just have a cross-contract call you probably have a cross-contract call you probably think that's worse than it is from a think that's worse than it is from a performance perspective performance perspective but it doesn't end up with like 10 000 but it doesn't end up with like 10 000 or a million copies of the same code or a million copies of the same code everywhere on the blockchain so it's the everywhere on the blockchain so it's the plus plus the um the second part of it though is the um the second part of it though is that if there is a lot of ecosystem that if there is a lot of ecosystem adapt adoption around some kind of adapt adoption around some kind of standardized standardized uh signature verifier we could always
uh signature verifier we could always deploy a native version of that that's deploy a native version of that that's super fast super fast i see i see so so so you are i'm not i want to make sure i'm not promising you that that's ever going to promising you that that's ever going to happen no no no no i'm not i'm not happen no no no no i'm not i'm not hearing your promise i'm just trying to hearing your promise i'm just trying to understand understand what level of code reuse you're assuming what level of code reuse you're assuming is going to work and also is going to work and also so you know calling calling a third so you know calling calling a third party to do your authentication for you definitely gets us into the question that is the other thing we're going to that is the other thing we're going to be discussing today which is mutability be discussing today which is mutability of contracts and like you know uh of contracts and like you know uh versioning your dependencies like i versioning your dependencies like i think if there's anything someone is think if there's anything someone is going to not want to trust to a third going to not want to trust to a third party it's it's the authentication path party it's it's the authentication path um unless they're 100 sure that that um unless they're 100 sure that that third party is third party is you know you know immutable and like the code that they immutable and like the code that they audited the last time they read it i think another option uh is you know you can it could be a cross-contract you can it could be a cross-contract call to this one contract that's living
call to this one contract that's living in one place so we're talking about in one place so we're talking about reduced wasm size reduced wasm size um it could also just be the library um it could also just be the library code that everybody's sharing so people understand people understand there is no mechanism for library there is no mechanism for library sharing besides stapling this like sharing besides stapling this like including the code into the contract including the code into the contract yeah yeah it's all right so obviously yeah yeah it's all right so obviously there's no there's no space saving like all these contracts space saving like all these contracts are going to have the same code within are going to have the same code within them them but addressing the the concern of people but addressing the the concern of people implementing these things correctly implementing these things correctly if everyone's using this common piece of if everyone's using this common piece of library code library code um um that has either been audited or that has either been audited or people generally have more trust in um people generally have more trust in um then then then they don't really you don't really have to worry so much about the have to worry so much about the mutability concern because they're mutability concern because they're choosing to build that into their choosing to build that into their contract at build time contract at build time there are some trade-offs there like
there are some trade-offs there like i i i think it would generally be a i i i think it would generally be a thing that would would would occur that thing that would would would occur that people would probably provide some of people would probably provide some of these like very standardized off these like very standardized off functions like single key or you know functions like single key or you know based off of seller accounts or stuff in based off of seller accounts or stuff in a library that you can use a library that you can use but if you want like a stateful system but if you want like a stateful system like lee you were talking about aliases like lee you were talking about aliases and that's why i keep coming back to and that's why i keep coming back to this like the stateful system is only this like the stateful system is only really useful if your state lives in a really useful if your state lives in a centralized place that centralized place that uh that people can rely on you know like uh that people can rely on you know like it would be really annoying for me to it would be really annoying for me to have to go and set my alias in every have to go and set my alias in every single contract that i use single contract that i use like i could like i could but it just that just seems really but it just that just seems really irritating irritating uh i think people would much prefer a uh i think people would much prefer a system where if that's an option system where if that's an option there is some global contract for that there is some global contract for that state limits basically i guess well i guess people could you could have a really simple contract it's could have a really simple contract it's just like an aliasing contract and you just like an aliasing contract and you could have library code that uses that i could have library code that uses that i don't know there's a lot of options here
when yeah like it is uh to me super interesting like is that interesting like is that so like what how do we think about that so like what how do we think about that like when you say like like when you say like when you make so this is like the smart when you make so this is like the smart wallet type of uh wallet type of uh like situation where the smart wallet is like situation where the smart wallet is is kind of shielding is kind of shielding or separating the uh or separating the uh whatever key you're using at that time whatever key you're using at that time from your from your persistent id on the network persistent id on the network uh uh i wouldn't necessarily call it like a i wouldn't necessarily call it like a smart wallet smart wallet it's kind of tangentially related i it's kind of tangentially related i guess it would be what i'm really saying guess it would be what i'm really saying is like i sign using key x is like i sign using key x but my public key always stays as y and but my public key always stays as y and i can change x to x prime or x double i can change x to x prime or x double prime or x triple prime but my public prime or x triple prime but my public key always stays y yeah so for context i think the aliasing came about because we were talking about came about because we were talking about how do we replicate what exists on how do we replicate what exists on stellar today in the smart world stellar today in the smart world and what we have today with mo like we and what we have today with mo like we often talk about stellar multisig but
often talk about stellar multisig but actually the other component of stella's actually the other component of stella's multisig that we get is aliasing because multisig that we get is aliasing because you can have an account you can have an account identifier and then you can attach other identifier and then you can attach other keys to it keys to it and so stellar accounts provide these and so stellar accounts provide these two concepts aliasing and then multisig two concepts aliasing and then multisig and i think and i think um um you know there's been the concern you know there's been the concern address uh address uh presented that you know we shouldn't presented that you know we shouldn't just implement the multi-sig that exists just implement the multi-sig that exists on classic on classic over on smart um because over on smart um because there's a lot of trade-offs with doing there's a lot of trade-offs with doing that um but the aliasing that um but the aliasing alone is is like a feature that i think alone is is like a feature that i think that's worth that's worth worth us exploring like what will that worth us exploring like what will that look like because it allows people to do look like because it allows people to do things like rotate their keys things like rotate their keys um or um or have multiple have multiple devices or using the same key devices or using the same key or using the same address and if i understand correctly john you're saying that that aliasing
you're saying that that aliasing capability could actually just be a capability could actually just be a contract contract yeah that's exactly what i'm saying any other questions on cap 52 i think because it's so fresh we i think because it's so fresh we probably need a bit more time to probably need a bit more time to get into the weeds john could you elaborate a little bit on how you see replay prevention happening how you see replay prevention happening so i see in the cap that there's this so i see in the cap that there's this announce announce that that concept exists um that that concept exists um yeah could you elaborate a little bit yeah could you elaborate a little bit with how you see contracts would with how you see contracts would typically do that typically do that yeah i'm happy to do that yeah i'm happy to do that uh so this whole replay prevention thing
uh so this whole replay prevention thing gets kind of annoying in this proposal gets kind of annoying in this proposal um that's one of like the big downsides um that's one of like the big downsides of this approach that i pointed out in of this approach that i pointed out in cat 50 when i said like why we shouldn't cat 50 when i said like why we shouldn't do this um do this um which is basically like every contract which is basically like every contract ends up implementing their own replay ends up implementing their own replay prevention when wherever it's needed prevention when wherever it's needed uh uh and this means that like things get and this means that like things get pretty annoying fast for example like pretty annoying fast for example like on stellar you like consider stuff on stellar you like consider stuff center today center today you might like submit a transaction and you might like submit a transaction and you know you have replay prevention on you know you have replay prevention on it because the sequence number and you it because the sequence number and you also have like you know also have like you know a uh a uh a deadline effectively a deadline effectively you know the uh max time you know the uh max time and and you know that if you get to that point you know that if you get to that point everything is done it can't execute or everything is done it can't execute or it has already executed it has already executed uh uh but like if you want that functionality but like if you want that functionality here you also have to implement the here you also have to implement the deadlines in your contract and all these deadlines in your contract and all these other things other things um and everything just gets kind of um and everything just gets kind of annoying fast basically annoying fast basically uh now again same kind of thing that i
uh now again same kind of thing that i was just talking about you could was just talking about you could actually because like in this approach actually because like in this approach because everything is done by signed because everything is done by signed messages messages you can actually delegate all of this you can actually delegate all of this to uh to like some other contract that to uh to like some other contract that deals with it so you can imagine deals with it so you can imagine implementing implementing stellar's times uh you know time downs stellar's times uh you know time downs and uh ledger bounds and all that other and uh ledger bounds and all that other stuff in a contract and reusing it stuff in a contract and reusing it if you still want it or you can rebuild if you still want it or you can rebuild in your own contract as well in your own contract as well but but basically there's no basically there's no generic generic nonce here nonce here and the cap goes into a little bit of and the cap goes into a little bit of detail about like why you can't use the detail about like why you can't use the sequence number sequence number uh and they're they're like my original uh and they're they're like my original proposal here actually proposal here actually had an example where the sequence number had an example where the sequence number was like the transaction sequence number was like the transaction sequence number was used as an us was used as an us but it had a couple like kind of but it had a couple like kind of annoying details about it specifically annoying details about it specifically like such a contract is like really like such a contract is like really vulnerable or such a design is really vulnerable or such a design is really vulnerable to uh vulnerable to uh what's it called uh confused deputy
what's it called uh confused deputy problems and if you try to fix the problems and if you try to fix the confused deputy problems then it becomes confused deputy problems then it becomes impossible to use the sequence number impossible to use the sequence number as a replay prevention tool as a replay prevention tool so there's a lot of trade-offs here so there's a lot of trade-offs here basically like i can imagine an argument basically like i can imagine an argument where we just say like hey like where we just say like hey like people should be cognizant of their people should be cognizant of their confused deputy problems etc confused deputy problems etc and we make that an option again i don't and we make that an option again i don't know if i would personally feel good know if i would personally feel good about that about that because confused deputy problems are because confused deputy problems are like a very difficult foot gun to deal like a very difficult foot gun to deal with i think like they're an easy thing with i think like they're an easy thing to overlook to overlook so so i don't know but basically yes every i don't know but basically yes every every contract is building their own every contract is building their own replay prevention or relying on it from replay prevention or relying on it from somewhere else on chain got it i think one nice side effect of one nice side effect of um um not exposing the transaction source not exposing the transaction source account on sequence number two the account on sequence number two the contract is that contracts are getting contract is that contracts are getting really set up for that common relay
really set up for that common relay pattern that we do see in other pattern that we do see in other ecosystems ecosystems where people design their contracts so where people design their contracts so that that the message that's getting the message that's getting signed to be used uh like the contract signed to be used uh like the contract call that's getting signed to be used on call that's getting signed to be used on chain chain is independent of is independent of the the participant who's actually submitting it participant who's actually submitting it and paying the fee and paying the fee and that that that participant could be and that that that participant could be like a third party like a third party um that has um that has you know is playing that role of you know is playing that role of relaying making sure that the relaying making sure that the transaction is on network so transaction is on network so in some ways it's nice it sort of sets in some ways it's nice it sort of sets up contracts to up contracts to to really work well with that because if to really work well with that because if a contract is written to use the source a contract is written to use the source count count you don't get like you would have to you don't get like you would have to then modify the contract to make it work then modify the contract to make it work with a relay yeah definitely you mentioned this to me like i don't know a week ago or like i don't know a week ago or something and that idea really kind of something and that idea really kind of stuck in my head when i was writing this stuck in my head when i was writing this so i totally agree with you that that's so i totally agree with you that that's a huge advantage of this design
i think something that i've i've heard i think maybe grading like raises a think maybe grading like raises a concern is um concern is um if we encourage people to write their if we encourage people to write their own replaying mechanisms which i don't own replaying mechanisms which i don't think we can actually really get away think we can actually really get away from so maybe it's not worth having this from so maybe it's not worth having this conversation but conversation but um um if we encourage people to write their if we encourage people to write their own replay mechanisms people may write own replay mechanisms people may write replay mechanisms that are really replay mechanisms that are really inefficient say is storing data on chain inefficient say is storing data on chain forever type of forever type of inefficient um inefficient um do you think there's anything that we do you think there's anything that we can provide that'll like maybe some can provide that'll like maybe some utilities that we can provide in the sdk utilities that we can provide in the sdk or even in the hose functions that might or even in the hose functions that might help people write help people write replay prevention mechanisms that are replay prevention mechanisms that are more efficient that you know use the more efficient that you know use the ledger in a less ledger in a less aggressive way i haven't given that too much thought honestly
honestly but like but like i i mean i i mean my general kind of perspective on this my general kind of perspective on this is you know it costs money to use the is you know it costs money to use the blockchain and people will be blockchain and people will be incentivized to do things that cost less incentivized to do things that cost less money money so so basically if there's a reason to do a basically if there's a reason to do a really inefficient replay prevention really inefficient replay prevention mechanism mechanism because it makes the rest of your because it makes the rest of your contract much simpler or maybe it's the contract much simpler or maybe it's the only way to even do it only way to even do it then i think people will do that but in then i think people will do that but in the absence of that need i think people the absence of that need i think people will favor the super simple mechanism will favor the super simple mechanism that's that's cheap uh whether i can guarantee that i cheap uh whether i can guarantee that i don't know and whether we can provide don't know and whether we can provide some utilities some utilities i'm not really sure i mean like a really i'm not really sure i mean like a really simple replay mechanism like a sequence simple replay mechanism like a sequence number is basically like you have a map number is basically like you have a map you look it up you check you increment you look it up you check you increment that's it that's it it it could be hard to make it much it it could be hard to make it much simpler i mean like we could provide simpler i mean like we could provide some like library functionality that some like library functionality that literally does that exact thing literally does that exact thing but the thing is if you have an account but the thing is if you have an account that already has per user data you would that already has per user data you would probably want to of like wrap the
probably want to of like wrap the non-sin with the other per user data non-sin with the other per user data and then the helper is not actually and then the helper is not actually helpful in that case so that's kind of the main perspective that's kind of the main perspective there but i i have been thinking in there but i i have been thinking in general this is like a bit of an aside general this is like a bit of an aside that it would be really helpful if the that it would be really helpful if the sdk provided some sdk provided some types like for example like there's the types like for example like there's the sc val map type which is like a map sc val map type which is like a map in the sense of like a conventional map in the sense of like a conventional map but i've also been thinking like but i've also been thinking like sometimes it's like you want to look at sometimes it's like you want to look at the data as in like i have a bunch of the data as in like i have a bunch of data stored in different ledger entries data stored in different ledger entries and be cool if there was a like a map and be cool if there was a like a map type that did that very easily instead type that did that very easily instead of having to use like the contract put of having to use like the contract put contract gap etc in cap 53. contract gap etc in cap 53. so maybe there's some interplay between so maybe there's some interplay between that and a replay prevention mechanism that and a replay prevention mechanism that we could learn from that we could learn from yeah i mean i think that yeah i mean i think that yeah all those things are going to yeah all those things are going to like as we develop like even basic like as we develop like even basic applications will factor you know like
applications will factor you know like this type of this type of basic functionality in some basic functionality in some traits right that that people would just traits right that that people would just use use i'm not actually too concerned about i'm not actually too concerned about yeah people having to write it because yeah people having to write it because we are going to write it we are going to write it um i think for more like maybe like um i think for more like maybe like different type of uh like uh replay different type of uh like uh replay prevention prevention like like i think that's kind of the nice thing i think that's kind of the nice thing about this proposal is that uh i know in about this proposal is that uh i know in the past we discussed like uh the past we discussed like uh you know potentially doing you know potentially doing very different things like where you very different things like where you have like those uh have like those uh um um like ephemeral type of uh you know like like ephemeral type of uh you know like things that only work in a specific things that only work in a specific time time period right so that you period right so that you um um you could in theory like replay in a you could in theory like replay in a specific uh specific uh window but in some design it's actually window but in some design it's actually acceptable acceptable and then you end up with like much and then you end up with like much simpler client-side code simpler client-side code so so yeah
and can i ask um it don't question but um you have a it don't question but um you have a function in here called knots of function in here called knots of how does that work what does that do how does that work what does that do uh it's just a contract internal uh it's just a contract internal function i don't know if the com function i don't know if the com comments emphasize that they don't comments emphasize that they don't um it's not a host function um it's not a host function basically it just it just reads the data basically it just it just reads the data i just read the larger entry and find i just read the larger entry and find the nonce in that the nonce in that would probably just be a single you know would probably just be a single you know integer sort in a lever entry integer sort in a lever entry non-sub in those cases is user non-sub in those cases is user maintained data associated with an maintained data associated with an address address yeah exactly contract maintain did i yeah exactly contract maintain did i want to say but yeah okay in in general i mean i i i'm a broken record i don't want to i'm a broken record i don't want to waste too much time with this but i'm i waste too much time with this but i'm i am i am extremely nervous about am i am extremely nervous about suggesting that users roll their own suggesting that users roll their own authentication mechanisms i think this
authentication mechanisms i think this is just this is just asking for disaster is just this is just asking for disaster but but i understand that we've been around this i understand that we've been around this like like a lot so a lot so um um you don't need to convince me i mean you don't need to convince me i mean providing the really really simple providing the really really simple authorization that mechanism is the only authorization that mechanism is the only one one i would strongly favor that approach i would strongly favor that approach um this just this just feels like it's um this just this just feels like it's going to be a disaster you're going to going to be a disaster you're going to have people who completely fail to have people who completely fail to because this this data this code path if because this this data this code path if you get it wrong is came over for you get it wrong is came over for everything and it's so easy to get it everything and it's so easy to get it almost right and almost right and your tests pass and you deploy it and your tests pass and you deploy it and you think everything's fine and then you think everything's fine and then it's not it's not so i'm so i'm i would love to not have users writing i would love to not have users writing this code but okay so um you know obviously i think we need to um you know obviously i think we need to dispense the value in this proposal dispense the value in this proposal um in the meantime we have 10 minutes
um in the meantime we have 10 minutes remaining and i'd love to hand it over remaining and i'd love to hand it over to to siddharth to talk a bit about the siddharth to talk a bit about the changes to the smart contract life cycle changes to the smart contract life cycle and potentially any and potentially any uh remit open questions that we need to uh remit open questions that we need to answer answer yeah uh so the most recent change was a yeah uh so the most recent change was a a small one about how the a small one about how the contract id which is which is now a hash contract id which is which is now a hash is calculated is calculated um and you can we can look at that um and you can we can look at that change it's pretty simple where the uh change it's pretty simple where the uh it's created from a transaction it's created from a transaction you hash source account a user provided you hash source account a user provided salt salt and if it's a contract created within and if it's a contract created within another contract you hash the parent another contract you hash the parent contract id contract id and and assault provided assault provided by the contract by the contract um um i mean if there are any questions there i mean if there are any questions there we can talk about it but i think the we can talk about it but i think the more interesting thing are these two more interesting thing are these two other points i want to bring up one is other points i want to bring up one is mutability mutability uh which is do we plan on adding uh which is do we plan on adding like initially the cap right now does like initially the cap right now does not have mutable contracts but the not have mutable contracts but the question is question is should we should we leave that question open for the future
leave that question open for the future or should we just say or should we just say contracts will always be immutable contracts will always be immutable and and the second thing is uh the second thing is uh we allow contracts to be removed so the we allow contracts to be removed so the cap has a host function cap has a host function to remove the contract code entry to remove the contract code entry um so i think we can start with um so i think we can start with the immutability question the immutability question right if so if we do allow mutable right if so if we do allow mutable contracts in the future a big question contracts in the future a big question was how do we deal with versioning was how do we deal with versioning and i was taking the approach that and i was taking the approach that let the contracts deal with it so for let the contracts deal with it so for contract a calls contract b and contract contract a calls contract b and contract b is mutable b is mutable contract may just trust that contract may just trust that just trust contracts bees uh creator just trust contracts bees uh creator or right so or right so i think grading i think grading had some issues with this had some issues with this uh uh graham you want you want to talk about graham you want you want to talk about this well i think they're just i i i keep coming back to the i i i keep coming back to the general sense i have that um
general sense i have that um cross-contract calls are cross-contract calls are something like dynamic linking um or or something like dynamic linking um or or package dependencies in software in package dependencies in software in general right that smart contractor general right that smart contractor software and this is this is a general software and this is this is a general software versioning problem and in software versioning problem and in general software general software has like natural tensions around has like natural tensions around versioning that versioning that people frequently want to people frequently want to lock to particular versions but they lock to particular versions but they also frequently want to get the newest also frequently want to get the newest latest and latest and there's a concept of newest latest that there's a concept of newest latest that is compatible and a concept of newest is compatible and a concept of newest latest that is not compatible that is latest that is not compatible that is often expressed in often expressed in major version numbers or or separate major version numbers or or separate apis or separate names for things apis or separate names for things and and i'm concerned that we are i'm concerned that we are not uh reproducing any of the infrastructure reproducing any of the infrastructure that would be normal to that would be normal to support support points on that points on that natural tension so i think i think it is natural tension so i think i think it is worth trying to provide some of the
worth trying to provide some of the building blocks that people are going to building blocks that people are going to provide themselves anyway because provide themselves anyway because it's it's bad enough to have like it's it's bad enough to have like versioning versioning uh it's worse if there are multiple uh it's worse if there are multiple versions of the versioning system and versions of the versioning system and you have to like opt into different you have to like opt into different versioning regimes depending on which versioning regimes depending on which ecosystem you're ecosystem you're adhering your contract to like i i adhering your contract to like i i understand there's just there's this understand there's just there's this natural tendency in our conversations natural tendency in our conversations here to try to push everything to the here to try to push everything to the ecosystem and let the ecosystem figure ecosystem and let the ecosystem figure stuff out let them let them develop stuff out let them let them develop patterns in the smart contract space patterns in the smart contract space that just that just solved the problem however contract solved the problem however contract users would like them to but that users would like them to but that that is not actually as much of a that is not actually as much of a solution as i think it sounds uh that solution as i think it sounds uh that that really strongly introduces the that really strongly introduces the possibility of totally incompatible possibility of totally incompatible regimes developing in parallel or regimes developing in parallel or inadequate regimes that inadequate regimes that miss some important aspect of the design miss some important aspect of the design because they were because they were cobbled together in a hurry cobbled together in a hurry so i i wouldn't so i i wouldn't mind us spending enough time to mind us spending enough time to be able to provide the basics which is be able to provide the basics which is like like i want to pin to a version
i want to pin to a version uh i want to pin to uh i want to pin to um um a major version and only get security a major version and only get security updates or i want to follow updates or i want to follow you know any new features and additions you know any new features and additions that people had including modifications that people had including modifications upgrades whatever upgrades whatever i feel like there's there's got to be a future where those are those are things that someone's going to provide things that someone's going to provide and it's and it's it's our position to potentially furnish it's our position to potentially furnish them um maybe it's not but that's what them um maybe it's not but that's what it feels like to me it feels like to me but like at our layer like is it but like at our layer like is it is it just uh having a way for to have is it just uh having a way for to have like committable versus uh mutable like committable versus uh mutable contracts and like the the versioning is contracts and like the the versioning is metadata basically and it's up to metadata basically and it's up to when you write a contract you know to when you write a contract you know to decide how you want to use this metadata decide how you want to use this metadata okay like when you make a cross-contract okay like when you make a cross-contract call at the moment a cross-contract call call at the moment a cross-contract call only identifies a contract id only identifies a contract id right right and it does not it does not right right and it does not it does not say say call this
call this but give me version five or give me but give me version five or give me version seven or whatever like there's version seven or whatever like there's there's no version information in there's no version information in cross-country calling right now which cross-country calling right now which means we're essentially always means we're essentially always dynamically linking to either dynamically linking to either immutable exactly the same thing or immutable exactly the same thing or immutable immutable whatever the person up to updated that whatever the person up to updated that contract with contract with the thing is that i mean you have a the thing is that i mean you have a bunch of uh bunch of uh of things that feel like if we if we do of things that feel like if we if we do that at the kind of protocol layer we're that at the kind of protocol layer we're kind of kind of printing those like for example like if printing those like for example like if you're you're talking about different you're you're talking about different versions right of a specific contract versions right of a specific contract um like you have what is uh like there are a bunch of questions like there are a bunch of questions around like you know you have a 1.0 but around like you know you have a 1.0 but maybe the 1.1 maybe the 1.1 is actually deployed by some somebody is actually deployed by some somebody else right like it's not even the same else right like it's not even the same author author like how do you like how do you deal with those type of situations
like who do you trust to be 1.1 i don't think we have the notion of oh like a of actual like a of actual like like or like you know the organization or or like you know the organization or whatever that is the whatever that is the the publisher right over have a contract the publisher right over have a contract yeah i agree we don't we don't have any yeah i agree we don't we don't have any notion about that i'm i'm i'm advocating notion about that i'm i'm i'm advocating for us to come up with a notion rather for us to come up with a notion rather than than uh saying but that notion like i think uh saying but that notion like i think it becomes it becomes i think in that space i don't think you can necessarily come up with a one size fits necessarily come up with a one size fits all all because it's not like in you know in because it's not like in you know in in like normal i mean they say like in like normal i mean they say like normal software like you have a company normal software like you have a company and they ship their their their thing and they ship their their their thing and and that's kind of it like here and and that's kind of it like here and also like if you depend on on a and also like if you depend on on a specific version right as a as a specific version right as a as a my installer basically is going to just my installer basically is going to just grab grab cause the os right to grab that version
cause the os right to grab that version that i depend on that i depend on uh only in a uh only in a blockchain type of situation if that other version like the cost of of of um of of um keeping that other version around keeping that other version around is actually on the uh is actually on the uh on whoever deployed that contract on whoever deployed that contract so if you say like oh i want to pin all so if you say like oh i want to pin all version like everything is always pinned version like everything is always pinned i think that that the implication there i think that that the implication there would be well okay the publisher is now would be well okay the publisher is now has to keep around all versions of of has to keep around all versions of of their contract their contract which is kind of you know which is kind of you know weird okay so is is is is is is could you make a a concrete proposal could you make a a concrete proposal here are you talking about uh you would here are you talking about uh you would like all contracts to be mutable like all contracts to be mutable immutable not immutable but mutable so immutable not immutable but mutable so you can mutate them you can mutate them and and uh uh if i ever want to uh have a pinned
if i ever want to uh have a pinned version i vendor it is that what you're version i vendor it is that what you're saying saying not necessarily so i think it's uh like not necessarily so i think it's uh like yeah you could have always vendor of yeah you could have always vendor of course course um uh i mean that's a solution and i'm i'm okay with that i just i think we have to okay with that i just i think we have to think through the scenario is what i'm think through the scenario is what i'm saying and i think if if what we're saying and i think if if what we're saying is we're not going to give any saying is we're not going to give any thought to the scenarios whatsoever and thought to the scenarios whatsoever and then we're going to tell everyone to then we're going to tell everyone to proxy every single call they make proxy every single call they make because that's the only that's the only because that's the only that's the only place they're going to have any ability place they're going to have any ability to to enforce policy enforce policy i think we're kind of i think we're kind of losing a good chance to to shape the losing a good chance to to shape the system i think it's more like what are like the things that are like support like a that things that are like support like a that you get with tooling that you know we you get with tooling that you know we can provide can provide versus things that are actually baked at versus things that are actually baked at the protocol layer um like i think that if you have a way to like i think that if you have a way to say uh because you know you'll also also have the other problem right of
have the other problem right of contract discovery on the network like contract discovery on the network like you know which net which contract do i you know which net which contract do i trust you know versus the ones that trust you know versus the ones that i partially trust versus the one i don't i partially trust versus the one i don't trust right trust right uh there are some that were basically uh there are some that were basically you trust you try that contract that you trust you try that contract that even if it was mutable you trust that even if it was mutable you trust that they are not going to they are not going to or you're actually fine with um with or you're actually fine with um with them modifying it in other situations them modifying it in other situations you do want to pin because you have like you do want to pin because you have like a a you know an actual you know an actual uh i mean maybe it's a stability thing uh i mean maybe it's a stability thing or whatever right there you have like or whatever right there you have like other other problems there problems there um um so so some of these data yeah like the so so some of these data yeah like the mutability mutability aspect i think that's actually yeah aspect i think that's actually yeah that's a property of the of the contract that's a property of the of the contract so that you know basically so that you know basically can i even can i even directly depend on this from my contract directly depend on this from my contract or is it potentially going to change or is it potentially going to change under me but then you have a different under me but then you have a different problem i think that problem i think that is um kind of like when you do uh you
is um kind of like when you do uh you know like with you know when you have know like with you know when you have your manifest files when you're when you your manifest files when you're when you decide that you're going to pin your decide that you're going to pin your dependencies right in your own program dependencies right in your own program um that decision um that decision is something where i think we have to is something where i think we have to just develop the the right tooling but it's not something that actually the the you know the network doesn't the you know the network doesn't shouldn't have i think an opinion on shouldn't have i think an opinion on on on you know like the this you know like the this even the schema of of uh how you pin even the schema of of uh how you pin things things like i said i guess i'm saying that the like i said i guess i'm saying that the network has to provide whatever is network has to provide whatever is necessary to support it so we we come up necessary to support it so we we come up with what we want we come up with what with what we want we come up with what the network needs to support it and i'm i'm not seeing that developing in our conversations we we we talk about conversations we we we talk about like like bad things can happen and then we throw bad things can happen and then we throw up our hands and say obviously we can't up our hands and say obviously we can't solve it like no no we have i think we solve it like no no we have i think we don't fight this one i agree we just try
don't fight this one i agree we just try to figure out what the pattern is and to figure out what the pattern is and then figure out what the network needs then figure out what the network needs to actually support it to actually support it right uh i think right uh i think it's we need to have to kind of to solve it's we need to have to kind of to solve those problems what i'm saying is that those problems what i'm saying is that we don't need to we don't need to [Music] [Music] because like the things that i've heard because like the things that i've heard so far they are in the context of a cap so far they are in the context of a cap and in the context of the cap and in the context of the cap we are saying this is going to be like we are saying this is going to be like we kind of uh forced a specific model at we kind of uh forced a specific model at the the uh protocol layer oh and i see a raised hand who is that i think i think it um needs to be in a cup like it needs to be in the design rationale it needs to be in the design rationale for this cup like if we're saying that for this cup like if we're saying that we're going to provide this limited set we're going to provide this limited set of functionality and you can go and do of functionality and you can go and do whatever you want we still need to whatever you want we still need to provide in the design rationale this is provide in the design rationale this is how we expect it will be used this is how we expect it will be used this is how we expect it will solve this problem how we expect it will solve this problem of versioning of versioning i mean i think like at least i can i mean i think like at least i can already see like there are some gaps already see like there are some gaps here you know if we say that
here you know if we say that um you're going to do um you're going to do all contracts are immutable so with an all contracts are immutable so with an eye eye and you're going to do versioning and you're going to do versioning yourself data migration how's data yourself data migration how's data migration going to work because like migration going to work because like right now we have cap right now we have cap 53 53 and contracts can't access other and contracts can't access other contracts data contracts data so how is contract you know v1 so how is contract you know v1 going going its data going to be migrated over to v2 its data going to be migrated over to v2 and then if we say that you know v1 and and then if we say that you know v1 and v2 are gonna v2 are gonna coexist at the same time coexist at the same time um you know how do contracts do that um you know how do contracts do that that seems rather complex yeah and especially yeah and actually like yeah in the yeah and actually like yeah in the context of cap 53 i agree that it's also context of cap 53 i agree that it's also you would change your like if your id on you would change your like if your id on the network is your contract like your the network is your contract like your you know the contract is your id type of you know the contract is your id type of thing thing you don't want to be you don't want to be changing your id like if you upgrade that contract
like if you upgrade that contract we got a request to speak from the we got a request to speak from the audience i know you don't know how to take them i'm not i don't think after i'm not i don't think after right right it's android question hello can you yep we can hear you great thanks yep we can hear you great thanks um appreciate the conversation and glad um appreciate the conversation and glad i was able to hop in um i'm going to i was able to hop in um i'm going to keep it short because it's going to be keep it short because it's going to be slightly off silo of what you're slightly off silo of what you're discussing discussing um um i am a week away from dropping um a i am a week away from dropping um a tokenized community with a coin that i'm tokenized community with a coin that i'm bringing over from raleigh into solana bringing over from raleigh into solana um and i want to develop on stellar and um and i want to develop on stellar and i've looked up online there's some i've looked up online there's some people that you know help you punch i people that you know help you punch i you know i'm just trying to understand you know i'm just trying to understand based on what i know based on what i know with moving forward with moving forward i mean who can i connect with so that i
i mean who can i connect with so that i can understand the liquidity and how the can understand the liquidity and how the stellar network works stellar network works and how i can make sure that that same and how i can make sure that that same liquidity i'm probably going to lose it liquidity i'm probably going to lose it but how i can transfer over to the but how i can transfer over to the stellar network and really make sure stellar network and really make sure that i look at all aspects of where i'm that i look at all aspects of where i'm launching so they don't have to wrap and launching so they don't have to wrap and do it differently in a month do you know do it differently in a month do you know what i'm saying what i'm saying yeah cassandra i appreciate the question yeah cassandra i appreciate the question this specific conversation is about this specific conversation is about a very like specific uh topic technical a very like specific uh topic technical topic topic um and um and you can you can go to the go to the uh to one of the other channels support uh to one of the other channels support for example for example uh ask that question and i'll be happy uh ask that question and i'll be happy to help you there okay thank you i'm to help you there okay thank you i'm just looking for a personal contact i'm just looking for a personal contact i'm not bringing in the conversation i just not bringing in the conversation i just i can't find anyone and i've left a i can't find anyone and i've left a couple messages in the chat but i'm not couple messages in the chat but i'm not sure who to talk to so who is just sure who to talk to so who is just speaking and then i'll tag you okay so um we're we're over time and uh i think
we're we're over time and uh i think there's some really interesting there's some really interesting discussions here that we probably need discussions here that we probably need to continue uh either on the jump cannon to continue uh either on the jump cannon dev channel here on discord or on the dev channel here on discord or on the mailing list mailing list so i think we should go with that so i think we should go with that thank you all for joining and tuning in thank you all for joining and tuning in and have a great rest of your day you